modules/ROOT/pages/installation/server.adoc, before:

= Server installation
:description: This section provides details on server installation.

Server installation is a two-step process.
The first step, as described in the previous section, is to setup a Neo4j DBMS to act as persistence for NOM.

The second step is to download and configure arguments and/or environment variables to the specific environment you want to run NOM in and either install NOM as a service or run it as a console application.
Both ways are described below.
Running as a service is the recommended way of operating the NOM Server.

Releases of Neo4j enterprise all come bundled with the most current version of NOM at the time of that Neo4j release.
Please note that this does not have to be the most current version of NOM.
You can find NOM as `.zip` or `.tar.gz` inside your Neo4j folder under `/products`.
Alternatively, you can download any version of the NOM Server, including the agent binaries here: https://neo4j.com/deployment-center/?ops-manager[Download].
In any case, please extract the content from the downloaded `.zip` or `.tar.gz` file to whichever directory you want to operate NOM from
(in the following referenced as NOM server-folder).

== Prerequisites

* 1 CPU core (2 recommended)
* 2 GB RAM (4 GB recommended)
* 15 GB disk space
* Windows or Unix-based operating system
* Java 17 or 21
* Key pair and certificate (as a PKCS12 file) to be used for TLS protected endpoints (see xref:installation/self-signed-certificate.adoc[] for test and demo purposes).
If key pair and certificate were generated with OpenSSL, ensure that OpenSSL version 3.x or later was used.

[NOTE]
====
If the certificate is not issued by a public CA, the intermediate certificate or the certificate from CA needs to be added to Java's trust store using the following command:
[source, terminal, role=noheader]
----
keytool -importcert -alias <alias> -file <path/to/cert/file> -cacerts -storepass <trust store password> -trustcacerts -noprompt
----
====

[IMPORTANT]
====
In case you have multiple versions of Java installed on the machine you will use for the server, you can set `JAVA_HOME` environment variable to point to the desired Java home directory.
====

[NOTE]
====
Pay close attention when entering configuration values that contain special (reserved) characters.
Which characters are special (reserved) depends on the operating system and the method of installation.
====

[[service]]
== Running as a service

=== Linux (systemd)
==== Setting arguments in service file

Navigate to the NOM server-folder under `etc/` where a `neo4j-ops-manager-server.service` file is located.
This file includes a section that needs to be adjusted to your environment (e.g. the Neo4j password you used for setting up the persistence database, the proper path to your ssl key-store file, etc.).

==== Using environment variables

As an alternative to changing the arguments in the `neo4j-ops-manager-server.service` file, you can instead use environment variables to achieve the same result.
The `neo4j-ops-manager-server.service` file contains the necessary information for this.
The table <<config_ref,here>> contains environment variables and example values.

==== Installation

Copy `neo4j-ops-manager-server.service` file into the directory `/etc/systemd/system`.

Next, execute the following commands to install the NOM Server as a service:

[source, terminal, role=noheader]
----
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl enable neo4j-ops-manager-server
----

==== Starting and stopping

Start the NOM Server as a service with the command:

[source, terminal, role=noheader]
----
sudo systemctl start neo4j-ops-manager-server
----

The NOM Server is now ready to use.

To stop the NOM Server, use the command:

[source, terminal, role=noheader]
----
sudo systemctl stop neo4j-ops-manager-server
----

[NOTE]
====
*For SELinux*

The SELinux context of the server binary must be changed so that it can be executed from the service.
To permanently change the SELinux context of the file, run the following commands:
[source, terminal, role=noheader]
----
sudo semanage fcontext -a -t bin_t <SERVER_PATH>/bin/server
sudo restorecon -v <SERVER_PATH>/bin/server
----
<SERVER_PATH> should be replaced with the path to the NOM server-folder.

====

=== Windows
==== Setting arguments in the service file

Navigate to the NOM server-folder under `bin\`, where a `server.xml` is located.
This file includes an `<arguments>` section that needs to be adjusted to your environment (e.g. the Neo4j password you used for setting up the persistence database, the proper path to your SSL key-store file, etc.).

==== Using environment variables

As an alternative to changing the arguments in the `server.xml` file, you can instead use environment variables to achieve the same result.
The `server.xml` file contains the necessary information for this.
The table <<config_ref,here>> contains environment variables and example values.

==== Installation

You install the server service using `server.exe`, provided in the NOM server folder under `bin\` by running the following command:

[source, terminal, role=noheader]
----
server.exe install
----

==== Starting and stopping

Once the installation is successfully completed, you can start the NOM Server as a service with the command:

[source, terminal, role=noheader]
----
server.exe start
----

The NOM Server is now ready to use.

To stop the NOM Server, use the command:

[source, terminal, role=noheader]
----
server.exe stop
----

== Running as a console application

[WARNING]
====
Although it is possible to run the NOM Server as a console application, it is not recommended.
Best practice is to run the NOM Server as a service, as described in the previous section.
====

[[unix]]
=== Unix
==== Passing arguments on command line

Navigate to the NOM Server folder and execute the following command:

[source, terminal, role=noheader]
----
java -jar ./lib/server.jar
        --spring.neo4j.uri=neo4j://localhost:7687
        --spring.neo4j.authentication.username=neo4j
        --spring.neo4j.authentication.password=password
        --server.port=8080
        --server.ssl.key-store-type=PKCS12
        --server.ssl.key-store=file:./certificates/server.pfx
        --server.ssl.key-store-password=changeit
        --grpc.server.port=9090
        --grpc.server.security.key-store-type=PKCS12
        --grpc.server.security.key-store=file:./certificates/server.pfx
        --grpc.server.security.key-store-password=changeit
----

Make sure to replace the arguments with values adjusted to your environment (e.g. the Neo4j password you used for setting up the persistence database, the proper path to your ssl key-store file, etc.).

==== Using environment variables

All the arguments from the command in the last section can also be defined as environment variables as described <<config_ref, here>>.

If you set all the arguments to environment variables, you can shorten the server start command to the following (provided that you have navigated to the NOM Server folder):

[source, terminal, role=noheader]
----
java -jar ./lib/server.jar
----

=== Windows
==== Passing arguments on the command line

Navigate to the NOM Server folder and execute the following command:

[source, terminal, role=noheader]
----
java -jar .\lib\server.jar
        --spring.neo4j.uri=neo4j://localhost:7687
        --spring.neo4j.authentication.username=neo4j
        --spring.neo4j.authentication.password=password
        --server.port=8080
        --server.ssl.key-store-type=PKCS12
        --server.ssl.key-store=file:.\certificates\server.pfx
        --server.ssl.key-store-password=changeit
        --grpc.server.port=9090
        --grpc.server.security.key-store-type=PKCS12
        --grpc.server.security.key-store=file:.\certificates\server.pfx
        --grpc.server.security.key-store-password=changeit
----

Make sure to replace the arguments with values adjusted to your environment (e.g. the Neo4j password you used for setting up the persistence database, the proper path to your ssl key-store file, etc.).

==== Using environment variables

All the arguments from the command in the last section can also be defined as environment variables as described <<config_ref, here>>.

If you set all the arguments to environment variables, you can shorten the server start command to the following (provided that you have navigated to the NOM Server folder):

[source, terminal, role=noheader]
----
java -jar .\lib\server.jar
----

[[self-registration-config]]
[NOTE]
====
If the NOM Server is required to support self-registered agents ensure that the configuration property `GRPC_SERVER_SECURITY_TRUST_CERT_COLLECTION` (or `grpc.server.security.trustCertCollection`) is provided to above commands.
It is described in the configuration reference table below.

Read more about agent self-registration xref:../addition/agent-installation/self-registered.adoc#agent_mtls[here].
====

== Running NOM server behind a proxy [[behind_proxy]]

If NOM server is running behind a proxy and is configured to access external web resources, its JVM must be started with appropriate proxy configuration options.
This configuration is also required for the auto-refresh of available Neo4j and NOM versions.

To pass proxy configuration options to the NOM server JVM, the environment variable `JAVA_OPTS` can be used, as shown in the following example:

[source, terminal, role=noheader]
----
JAVA_OPTS=-Dhttp.proxyHost=myproxy.example.com -Dhttp.proxyPort=8080
----

If running NOM server as a service, the environment variable can be set in the service configuration file.

For details about configuring proxy in Java, see link:https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/21/docs/api/java.base/java/net/doc-files/net-properties.html#proxies-heading[Java documentation].

== Server configuration reference [[config_ref]]

[cols="<,<,<, <",options="header"]
|===
| Command line argument
| Environment variable name
| Description
| Example value

| `spring.neo4j.uri`
| `SPRING_NEO4J_URI`
| Neo4j URI for NOM persistence DBMS
| neo4j://localhost:7687

|`spring.neo4j.authentication.username`
| `SPRING_NEO4J_AUTHENTICATION_USERNAME`
| Neo4j user name for NOM persistence DBMS
| neo4j

|`spring.neo4j.authentication.password`
| `SPRING_NEO4J_AUTHENTICATION_PASSWORD`
| Neo4j password for NOM persistence DBMS
| password

|`server.port`
| `SERVER_PORT`
| The port that the server will listen on for HTTP traffic
| 8080

| `server.ssl.key-store-type`
| `SERVER_SSL_KEY_STORE_TYPE`
| Type of key store used for HTTP traffic
| PKCS12

| `server.ssl.key-store`
| `SERVER_SSL_KEY_STORE`
|  Location of key store used for HTTP traffic
| `file:./../certificates/server.pfx`

| `server.ssl.key-store-password`
| `SERVER_SSL_KEY_STORE_PASSWORD`
|  Password of key store used for HTTP traffic
| changeit

| `grpc.server.port`
| `GRPC_SERVER_PORT`
| The port that the server will listen on for GRPC traffic
| 9090

| `grpc.server.security.key-store-type`
| `GRPC_SERVER_SECURITY_KEY_STORE_TYPE`
| Type of key store used for GRPC traffic
| PKCS12

| `grpc.server.security.key-store`
| `GRPC_SERVER_SECURITY_KEY_STORE`
| Location of key store used for GRPC traffic
| `file:./../certificates/server.pfx`

| `grpc.server.security.key-store-password`
| `GRPC_SERVER_SECURITY_KEY_STORE_PASSWORD`
|  Password of key store used for GRPC traffic
| changeit

| `jwt.secret`
| `JWT_SECRET`
| Random string used for JWT signing (optional)
| please-set-a-random-secret-string-here-for-jwt-signing

| `optout.crash-analytics`
| `OPTOUT_CRASH_ANALYTICS`
| Set to true to opt out of product analytics being sent to Neo4j (optional)
| false

| `optout.product-analytics`
| `OPTOUT_PRODUCT_ANALYTICS`
| Set to true to opt out of crash analytics being sent to Neo4j (optional)
| false

| `optout.version-check`
| `OPTOUT_VERSION_CHECK`
| Set to true to opt out of automatic fetching of version information for NOM and Neo4j (optional)
| false

| `grpc.server.security.trustCertCollection`
| `GRPC_SERVER_SECURITY_TRUST_CERT_COLLECTION`
| File containing list of PEM encoded agent certificates. Required for agent self-registration. (optional)
| `file:/path/to/agent-certs.pem`

| `logging.file.name`
| `LOGGING_FILE_NAME`
| If set, logs of NOM server will be written to the file designated by this location. If not set, logs will be written to STDOUT. (optional)
| `/var/log/nom-server.log`

| `logging.level.root`
| `LOGGING_LEVEL_ROOT`
| Root log level. Default is `warn`. (optional)
| `error`, `warn`, `info`, `debug` or `trace`

| `logging.level.com.neo4j`
| `LOGGING_LEVEL_COM_NEO4J`
| Log level of the `com.neo4j` logger (its output corresponds to what NOM server itself logs). Default: `info`. (optional)
| `error`, `warn`, `info`, `debug` or `trace`
|===

== Accessing Ops Manager

For details on how to access Ops Manager after installation as described in the sections above, please see xref:../home-page/index.adoc[Home page].

Commit message:

Document JWT_TIME_TO_LIVE (#248)
document jwt-time-to-live

modules/ROOT/pages/installation/server.adoc, after:

= Server installation
:description: This section provides details on server installation.

Server installation is a two-step process.
The first step, as described in the previous section, is to setup a Neo4j DBMS to act as persistence for NOM.

The second step is to download and configure arguments and/or environment variables to the specific environment you want to run NOM in and either install NOM as a service or run it as a console application.
Both ways are described below.
Running as a service is the recommended way of operating the NOM Server.

Releases of Neo4j enterprise all come bundled with the most current version of NOM at the time of that Neo4j release.
Please note that this does not have to be the most current version of NOM.
You can find NOM as `.zip` or `.tar.gz` inside your Neo4j folder under `/products`.
Alternatively, you can download any version of the NOM Server, including the agent binaries here: https://neo4j.com/deployment-center/?ops-manager[Download].
In any case, please extract the content from the downloaded `.zip` or `.tar.gz` file to whichever directory you want to operate NOM from
(in the following referenced as NOM server-folder).

== Prerequisites

* 1 CPU core (2 recommended)
* 2 GB RAM (4 GB recommended)
* 15 GB disk space
* Windows or Unix-based operating system
* Java 17 or 21
* Key pair and certificate (as a PKCS12 file) to be used for TLS protected endpoints (see xref:installation/self-signed-certificate.adoc[] for test and demo purposes).
If key pair and certificate were generated with OpenSSL, ensure that OpenSSL version 3.x or later was used.

[NOTE]
====
If the certificate is not issued by a public CA, the intermediate certificate or the certificate from CA needs to be added to Java's trust store using the following command:
[source, terminal, role=noheader]
----
keytool -importcert -alias <alias> -file <path/to/cert/file> -cacerts -storepass <trust store password> -trustcacerts -noprompt
----
====

[IMPORTANT]
====
In case you have multiple versions of Java installed on the machine you will use for the server, you can set `JAVA_HOME` environment variable to point to the desired Java home directory.
====

[NOTE]
====
Pay close attention when entering configuration values that contain special (reserved) characters.
Which characters are special (reserved) depends on the operating system and the method of installation.
====

[[service]]
== Running as a service

=== Linux (systemd)
==== Setting arguments in service file

Navigate to the NOM server-folder under `etc/` where a `neo4j-ops-manager-server.service` file is located.
This file includes a section that needs to be adjusted to your environment (e.g. the Neo4j password you used for setting up the persistence database, the proper path to your ssl key-store file, etc.).

==== Using environment variables

As an alternative to changing the arguments in the `neo4j-ops-manager-server.service` file, you can instead use environment variables to achieve the same result.
The `neo4j-ops-manager-server.service` file contains the necessary information for this.
The table <<config_ref,here>> contains environment variables and example values.

==== Installation

Copy `neo4j-ops-manager-server.service` file into the directory `/etc/systemd/system`.

Next, execute the following commands to install the NOM Server as a service:

[source, terminal, role=noheader]
----
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl enable neo4j-ops-manager-server
----

==== Starting and stopping

Start the NOM Server as a service with the command:

[source, terminal, role=noheader]
----
sudo systemctl start neo4j-ops-manager-server
----

The NOM Server is now ready to use.

To stop the NOM Server, use the command:

[source, terminal, role=noheader]
----
sudo systemctl stop neo4j-ops-manager-server
----

[NOTE]
====
*For SELinux*

The SELinux context of the server binary must be changed so that it can be executed from the service.
To permanently change the SELinux context of the file, run the following commands:
[source, terminal, role=noheader]
----
sudo semanage fcontext -a -t bin_t <SERVER_PATH>/bin/server
sudo restorecon -v <SERVER_PATH>/bin/server
----
<SERVER_PATH> should be replaced with the path to the NOM server-folder.

====

=== Windows
==== Setting arguments in the service file

Navigate to the NOM server-folder under `bin\`, where a `server.xml` is located.
This file includes an `<arguments>` section that needs to be adjusted to your environment (e.g. the Neo4j password you used for setting up the persistence database, the proper path to your SSL key-store file, etc.).

==== Using environment variables

As an alternative to changing the arguments in the `server.xml` file, you can instead use environment variables to achieve the same result.
The `server.xml` file contains the necessary information for this.
The table <<config_ref,here>> contains environment variables and example values.

==== Installation

You install the server service using `server.exe`, provided in the NOM server folder under `bin\` by running the following command:

[source, terminal, role=noheader]
----
server.exe install
----

==== Starting and stopping

Once the installation is successfully completed, you can start the NOM Server as a service with the command:

[source, terminal, role=noheader]
----
server.exe start
----

The NOM Server is now ready to use.

To stop the NOM Server, use the command:

[source, terminal, role=noheader]
----
server.exe stop
----

== Running as a console application

[WARNING]
====
Although it is possible to run the NOM Server as a console application, it is not recommended.
Best practice is to run the NOM Server as a service, as described in the previous section.
====

[[unix]]
=== Unix
==== Passing arguments on command line

Navigate to the NOM Server folder and execute the following command:

[source, terminal, role=noheader]
----
java -jar ./lib/server.jar
        --spring.neo4j.uri=neo4j://localhost:7687
        --spring.neo4j.authentication.username=neo4j
        --spring.neo4j.authentication.password=password
        --server.port=8080
        --server.ssl.key-store-type=PKCS12
        --server.ssl.key-store=file:./certificates/server.pfx
        --server.ssl.key-store-password=changeit
        --grpc.server.port=9090
        --grpc.server.security.key-store-type=PKCS12
        --grpc.server.security.key-store=file:./certificates/server.pfx
        --grpc.server.security.key-store-password=changeit
----

Make sure to replace the arguments with values adjusted to your environment (e.g. the Neo4j password you used for setting up the persistence database, the proper path to your ssl key-store file, etc.).

==== Using environment variables

All the arguments from the command in the last section can also be defined as environment variables as described <<config_ref, here>>.

If you set all the arguments to environment variables, you can shorten the server start command to the following (provided that you have navigated to the NOM Server folder):

[source, terminal, role=noheader]
----
java -jar ./lib/server.jar
----

=== Windows
==== Passing arguments on the command line

Navigate to the NOM Server folder and execute the following command:

[source, terminal, role=noheader]
----
java -jar .\lib\server.jar
        --spring.neo4j.uri=neo4j://localhost:7687
        --spring.neo4j.authentication.username=neo4j
        --spring.neo4j.authentication.password=password
        --server.port=8080
        --server.ssl.key-store-type=PKCS12
        --server.ssl.key-store=file:.\certificates\server.pfx
        --server.ssl.key-store-password=changeit
        --grpc.server.port=9090
        --grpc.server.security.key-store-type=PKCS12
        --grpc.server.security.key-store=file:.\certificates\server.pfx
        --grpc.server.security.key-store-password=changeit
----

Make sure to replace the arguments with values adjusted to your environment (e.g. the Neo4j password you used for setting up the persistence database, the proper path to your ssl key-store file, etc.).

==== Using environment variables

All the arguments from the command in the last section can also be defined as environment variables as described <<config_ref, here>>.

If you set all the arguments to environment variables, you can shorten the server start command to the following (provided that you have navigated to the NOM Server folder):

[source, terminal, role=noheader]
----
java -jar .\lib\server.jar
----

[[self-registration-config]]
[NOTE]
====
If the NOM Server is required to support self-registered agents ensure that the configuration property `GRPC_SERVER_SECURITY_TRUST_CERT_COLLECTION` (or `grpc.server.security.trustCertCollection`) is provided to above commands.
It is described in the configuration reference table below.

Read more about agent self-registration xref:../addition/agent-installation/self-registered.adoc#agent_mtls[here].
====

== Running NOM server behind a proxy [[behind_proxy]]

If NOM server is running behind a proxy and is configured to access external web resources, its JVM must be started with appropriate proxy configuration options.
This configuration is also required for the auto-refresh of available Neo4j and NOM versions.

To pass proxy configuration options to the NOM server JVM, the environment variable `JAVA_OPTS` can be used, as shown in the following example:

[source, terminal, role=noheader]
----
JAVA_OPTS=-Dhttp.proxyHost=myproxy.example.com -Dhttp.proxyPort=8080
----

If running NOM server as a service, the environment variable can be set in the service configuration file.

For details about configuring proxy in Java, see link:https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/21/docs/api/java.base/java/net/doc-files/net-properties.html#proxies-heading[Java documentation].

== Server configuration reference [[config_ref]]

[cols="<,<,<, <",options="header"]
|===
| Command line argument
| Environment variable name
| Description
| Example value

| `spring.neo4j.uri`
| `SPRING_NEO4J_URI`
| Neo4j URI for NOM persistence DBMS
| neo4j://localhost:7687

|`spring.neo4j.authentication.username`
| `SPRING_NEO4J_AUTHENTICATION_USERNAME`
| Neo4j user name for NOM persistence DBMS
| neo4j

|`spring.neo4j.authentication.password`
| `SPRING_NEO4J_AUTHENTICATION_PASSWORD`
| Neo4j password for NOM persistence DBMS
| password

|`server.port`
| `SERVER_PORT`
| The port that the server will listen on for HTTP traffic
| 8080

| `server.ssl.key-store-type`
| `SERVER_SSL_KEY_STORE_TYPE`
| Type of key store used for HTTP traffic
| PKCS12

| `server.ssl.key-store`
| `SERVER_SSL_KEY_STORE`
|  Location of key store used for HTTP traffic
| `file:./../certificates/server.pfx`

| `server.ssl.key-store-password`
| `SERVER_SSL_KEY_STORE_PASSWORD`
|  Password of key store used for HTTP traffic
| changeit

| `grpc.server.port`
| `GRPC_SERVER_PORT`
| The port that the server will listen on for GRPC traffic
| 9090

| `grpc.server.security.key-store-type`
| `GRPC_SERVER_SECURITY_KEY_STORE_TYPE`
| Type of key store used for GRPC traffic
| PKCS12

| `grpc.server.security.key-store`
| `GRPC_SERVER_SECURITY_KEY_STORE`
| Location of key store used for GRPC traffic
| `file:./../certificates/server.pfx`

| `grpc.server.security.key-store-password`
| `GRPC_SERVER_SECURITY_KEY_STORE_PASSWORD`
|  Password of key store used for GRPC traffic
| changeit

| `jwt.secret`
| `JWT_SECRET`
| Random string used for JWT signing (optional)
| please-set-a-random-secret-string-here-for-jwt-signing

| `jwt.time-to-live`
| `JWT_TIME_TO_LIVE`
| JWT time to live, configures the session expiration time. For syntax, see https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/reference/features/external-config.html#features.external-config.typesafe-configuration-properties.conversion.durations[Spring documentation] (optional)
| 1h

| `optout.crash-analytics`
| `OPTOUT_CRASH_ANALYTICS`
| Set to true to opt out of product analytics being sent to Neo4j (optional)
| false

| `optout.product-analytics`
| `OPTOUT_PRODUCT_ANALYTICS`
| Set to true to opt out of crash analytics being sent to Neo4j (optional)
| false

| `optout.version-check`
| `OPTOUT_VERSION_CHECK`
| Set to true to opt out of automatic fetching of version information for NOM and Neo4j (optional)
| false

| `grpc.server.security.trustCertCollection`
| `GRPC_SERVER_SECURITY_TRUST_CERT_COLLECTION`
| File containing list of PEM encoded agent certificates. Required for agent self-registration. (optional)
| `file:/path/to/agent-certs.pem`

| `logging.file.name`
| `LOGGING_FILE_NAME`
| If set, logs of NOM server will be written to the file designated by this location. If not set, logs will be written to STDOUT. (optional)
| `/var/log/nom-server.log`

| `logging.level.root`
| `LOGGING_LEVEL_ROOT`
| Root log level. Default is `warn`. (optional)
| `error`, `warn`, `info`, `debug` or `trace`

| `logging.level.com.neo4j`
| `LOGGING_LEVEL_COM_NEO4J`
| Log level of the `com.neo4j` logger (its output corresponds to what NOM server itself logs). Default: `info`. (optional)
| `error`, `warn`, `info`, `debug` or `trace`
|===

== Accessing Ops Manager

For details on how to access Ops Manager after installation as described in the sections above, please see xref:../home-page/index.adoc[Home page].
